has Israel achieved its objectives by
launching Wars on Gaza for decades it
has bombed the strip and laid Siege to
Palestinians there now it's carrying out
yet another war on a scale never seen
before but will it serve Israel's
purposes this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I'm Tom
McCrae Israeli troops have entered Gaza
from its north and east and intense
fighting is being reported between
Israeli soldiers and Hamas Fighters
that's as the strip is being
continuously bombarded so far more than
8,300 Palestinians have been killed with
that number Rising all the time this is
not the first time Israel has launched a
military offensive in the territory this
this is its fifth since
2007 protests are being held around the
world in support of the Palestinians and
many fear the conflict could spread
through the region and Beyond so is
peace possible and what does Israel seek
to gain from its unprecedented war on
Gaza there's plenty to discuss with our
guests but first this report by Sara
Gill that looks at Israel's military
actions and the history behind
them Balls of Fire have lit up the sky
above Gaza every night since October the
7th but a Communications blackout
followed by one of Israel's most
ferocious bombardments laid the
foundations of its ground Invasion
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu says he will not give demands
for a ceasefire just as the United
States would not agree to a ceasefire
after the bombing of Pearl Harbor or
after the terrorist attack of 911 Israel
will not agree to a cation of
hostilities with
after the horrific attacks of October
7th calls for a ceasefire are calls for
Israel to surrender to Hamas to
surrender to terrorism to surrender to
barbarism that will not
happen Israel first occupied the Gaza
Strip in 1967 and has held a tight grip
ever since in 2005 it disengaged
ordering Jewish settlers to leave but it
has kept control of the lives of
Palestinians ever
since and in 2007 it imposed a blockade
of land air and sea after Hamas took
control of the territory from fata since
2008 Israel has repeatedly launched
attacks on the densely populated
area today Israeli tanks have been seen
on one of the main roads in Gaza linking
the North and South they are believed to
be preparing to divide the
strip
Hamas says its Fighters are battling
Israeli forces but for people who live
in Gaza they say nowhere is safe we're
in constant fear constant pomping we we
hear the sounds all the time day and
night we go to bed in fear we hug each
other when we don't know if we going to
wake up or not this is the fifth cycle
of violence in Gaza in recent years and
it's even led to increased fighting
between Israeli forces and Hezbollah on
the border between Lebanon and
Israel it's fueling fears of a wider
conflict in the Middle East and possibly
Beyond many are questioning Israel's
motives and what it may gain and lose by
waging this unprecedented war on
Gaza SAR Gil for Inside
Story
okay let's bring in our guests now in
Tel Aviv is Michael Harari policy fellow
at The midf Institute a political Think
Tank he is also the former Israeli
ambassador to Cyprus and the former
counselor for political Affairs at the
Embassy of Israel in the United Kingdom
in Cairo is Sara Kira founder and
director of European North African
Center of research and in London is
Shashank Joshi the defense editor with
the economists thank you all very much
for being uh with us here on Inside
Story Michael if I could please begin
with you Israel's stated goal is to wipe
out hamas's both a militant group and a
political force inside Gaza how
realistic is that from from an Israeli
point of
view well it's going to be quite
difficult very difficult I mean actually
but I think it becomes clear now now
after October the 7th that this is what
should be done let's say I think it
becomes clear in Israel for all Israelis
because previous to that I mean we had
different kind of views or different
kind of perceptions that we may be able
to deter Hamas etc etc and I think it it
is quite clear for the international and
Regional Arena to be honest I mean it's
quite impressive the support for the
Israeli let's say operation right now
not a a I mean and not confuse ourself
let's say between the support of not
enabling Hamas any achievement not
enabling Iran any achievement and of
course the Deep concern about the
humanitarian situation so I I think it
is going to be very difficult absolutely
but but it's quite realistic to be
honest okay Sarah do you think that at
this point in time that Israel has a
long-term plan when it comes to an
extended War
well uh I don't think Israel can uh take
on a very long War uh especially that
it's um it's losing its diplomatic ties
it's losing its normalization steps it's
losing Decades of soft diplomacy and
integration in the region today with
this hostile act Israel is making
everything difficult for itself not for
anyone else it's not realistic at all
because the country it Israel as a state
in this region cannot practice this um
this kind of practices especially that
it's trying to be integrated it's trying
to win over neighbors so it it doesn't
look realistic to lose Decades of
diplomacy isn't it shash do you think
that Israel has potentially bagged
itself into a bit of a corner here by
saying so early on after October the 7th
that it was going to decimate Hamas with
a huge ground invasion was going to
completely overwhelm it do you think
that now it could be potentially
perceived as being weak if it doesn't
follow through on those threats that it
made so early on
here yes I should say Israel never
committed to a full-scale ground
Invasion but it did commit to the
destruction of Hamas and I think that
that is a risk that it finds itself
unable to do so in a reasonable time
frame and it is worth remembering here
that almost every previous ground
invasion of Gaza has been roughly in the
region of two weeks we're now seeing
Israeli officials talk about a war that
may last for a few months but if you
think about the extent of hamas's
network inside Gaza the fact that they
have been running Gaza formally for 16
years but of course their influence
inside the strip goes back a long way
before that uh this is going to be an
exceptionally difficult military job and
unless they can buy themselves The
Diplomatic space to conduct military
operations in Gaza probably for years to
come I think it's it's not going to be
realistic that they can completely
eliminate hamas's military and political
presence and therefore you will be back
to some kind of situation in which they
will be containing and managing hamas's
presence rather than having destroyed it
altogether at the
end Michael what's your response to that
is is there an appetite uh for war for
for a full invasion is there a thirst
for Revenge within Israel and do you
think that that is clouding any judgment
uh in terms of the the the consequences
of having a long drawn out
War I I I fully understand of course
these question marks I mean I share most
of them if not all of them what I'm
saying is that this is a different
situation this is not as the round of
violence that we had in the last few few
few years every year and or or or two
years let's say this is a different
situation I think it this is why I
emphasize that nowadays it is very clear
to Israel that this is what what it has
to do now it's going to be not a I mean
a long process but I I don't think it's
going to take let's say months or years
I mean I I don't I don't let's say
accept any given statement by whoever
let's say yes it is correct as Sarah
said that diplomatically Israel needs to
keep its room to maneuver
up to now almost a month after let's say
the barbaric attacks by Hamas to be
honest I am still impressed by the let's
say support strategic support of the
region itself as well with a lot of
tension a lot of pressure domestically
in each Arab country let's say and of
course public opinion let's say in the
region and out of the region a a concern
of the situation but there is a clear
understanding again for the necessity to
top Hamas now will it will we succeed I
think it's realistic but I'm not sure we
will succeed no I cannot I cannot
guarantee a a success but it is a common
it is a common I would say goal for too
many actors in the region and out of the
region okay I just want to bring in uh a
a little bit more on this when we talk
about the ground Invasion because before
Israeli troops entered Gaza I spoke with
David Petraeus a former director of the
US Central Intelligence Agency about the
risks that come with a ground Invasion
here's what he had to say about that
what would be an extraordinarily
challenging
scenario it's hard to appreciate in fact
how difficult this would be we've Des
described it as
fishlyn add in a an enemy who's willing
to kill himself to take uh Israelis with
them a movement that as you know is
founded on the idea of destroying Israel
and killing Jews as we saw uh Saturday
over a week ago with the horrific murder
barbaric actions of over 1,300 Israelis
uh this would be a very very challenging
Mission keep in mind that it took the
Iraqi security forces nine months uh to
clear a similar
uh city mosul of the Islamic State other
terrorist elements obviously extremists
with support of the US the Israelis are
much better they have a lot more
capability well that's clearly someone
who knows a lot about ground invasions
having been involved in the US uh
invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan she
militarily how difficult is this going
to be for the Israeli troops to to try
and take Northern Gaza with the
extensive tunnel Network that Hamas has
got
there well the answer is very difficult
and just to give you a sense of why
let's reflect on the fact that in 2014
during operation protective Edge the
last major Israel Gaza conflict the IDF
as I understand it took out about 32
kilm of Hamas tunnels as I understand it
there's about 1300 kilm of those tunnels
across Gaza so that gives you an
indication of how difficult that is we
can also compare this to other
comparable Urban conflicts and if you
look at the Coalition effort to try to
remove Islamic State from mosul back in
2017 that was a nine-month campaign uh
on the ground preceded by uh many months
prior to that of air strikes that still
uh incurred uh it costus very heavy
civilian casualties and it was conducted
using a ground force of Iraqi units um
who were able to benefit from Western
intelligence and Western drones and
Western airow
this is going to be a different kind of
campaign it's going to be a different
campaign um because the IDF will have to
do it itself the IDF is a conscript Army
of course a large number of those who've
been mobilized are not regular
professionals and it will have to do
this on an accelerated timetable much
more quickly than the Coalition was able
to do in musul so all in all um this is
going to be difficult even in relation
to all of these extremely difficult
Urban campaigns of fuja ramadi mosul and
others even by those standards it will
be difficult Sarah we've all seen the
the civilian cost already in in the in
the weeks since October the 7th that is
clearly only going to become worse once
a full ground invasion is underway isn't
it full ground invasion is totally a
breach to humanity that that's how
exactly we see it first of all we refuse
the comparison of Islamic state to Hamas
even if some of the countries the Arab
countries are not getting along with
Hamas but the comparison here is
rejected especially because this is a
resistance group we call hamus a
resistance group because they fight for
the civilians of Gaza that's how we see
it even now all the Arab people who were
against Hamas now they are revolving
around them who did you think did that I
think the Israeli Prime Minister did
that he enforced Iran and ham in the
region it doesn't have to be the fault
of civilians today it doesn't have to
fall on the expense of four 4,000 little
kids it doesn't have to be that way we
don't have to see the scener okay if
Israel has more uh uh uh uh aspiration
in expanding in the region that's also
rejected evacuating the people from a
land a territory that is theirs already
but under the colonization of Israel so
that should be respected because there
is international law in that part to
protect civilians and to protect
Israel's right and to protect the
neighbors right but Israel first has to
draw its borders in order not to face
this kind of conflicts again in the
region this region doesn't need Israel
should have focused on the Iranian
actions in the region and try to like
protect itself yes yeah Michael
complicating this even further is the
fact that there's more than 200 Israeli
captives being held by Hamas somewhere
uh in Gaza I mean do you think that that
uh that's a priority for Israel I know a
lot of family members of those being
housed
are outraged that not more has been
done this is a priority for is but it
only emphasize the complexity of the
situation I said day before yesterday in
different interview that the families of
the hostages should do their job to
exert as much pressure as possible over
the government and the government should
do its job in order to release them
still for our discussion it complicates
very much love the operation in Gaza how
do you deal with the your duty to
release them and to dismal Hamas I want
but please to comment on General peto's
let's say comment that you brought yes I
think that Israel made that it does not
want to reoccupy the whole Gaza stre
Israel did not say that it is having
let's say full ground operation it did
not say so in my opinion it means that
this process which will be let's say
long I have no idea how long it takes
will be reexamined by the developments
on the ground and one more point the aim
or let's say is what Israel is trying to
do is to exert pressure as much as
possible over Hamas by distinguishing it
from the Palestinian people in Gaza
street are we successful doing doing it
not not not fully SU uccessful I'm aware
of there so many civilian casualties
let's say in Gaz let's say in Gaza stre
but but basically this is Israeli policy
now I am fully aware and fully
understandable let's say to the pro
Palestinian solidarity feeling all over
the region but please don't don't make
mistakes it's just final statement
there's a distinction between solidarity
with the Palestinian people and let's
say against
Hamas sorry understood shank as we saw
on October the 7th uh Israel's military
and intelligence had a massive failure
some said that they were even
embarrassed by how easy it was for Hamas
uh to go across the border do you think
that Israel's Army has been
overestimated and on the other side of
that do you think that a ground offense
uh actually plays into hamas's hands
because obviously it doesn't have tanks
or any war planes but it can fight
Street to Street Building to building
tunnel to
Tunnel yes first of all I think that all
all countries are at risk of
intelligence failures it does happen to
all countries it happened to the United
States on 911 uh it has happened to
European countries with terrorism in the
last last 5 to 10 years um even Ukraine
itself was surprised by the Russian
attack having discounted American
intelligence um but it is nevertheless
the case that the Israel Defense Forces
Remain the most technologically
sophisticated and well-trained Armed
Force in the Middle East you may like
them you may despise them but that's
that's a professional assessment about
their proficiency on the ground but
nonetheless I think you're absolutely
right to say that certain types of
invasions can play into the hands of
Hamas um the aim of terrorism and not
withstanding my colleagues reference to
Hamas as resistance group the aim of
terrorism is the Strategic use of
violence it is sometimes designed to
provoke a response that can worsen
conditions for civilians in an area by
dragging an Army in uh and by uh
creating political conditions that favor
the terrorist organization that is what
we saw from Al-Qaeda it's what we have
seen from other groups and it could be
what we see from Hamas so while my view
is uh no Armed Force in the world could
stand by after the kind of Massacre that
we saw on October 7th and it is entirely
understandable that Israel needs to
weaken and degrade Hamas so that it
cannot repeat that kind of Massacre um
if it were to be sucked into Gaza in an
open-ended occupation I think that the
risk as we have seen in some previous
Israeli conflicts like that in Lebanon
in the 1980s is that it creates
political conditions that may perversely
favor Hamas and I think no Israeli
official would really seek that no
indeed so there's also a risk of this
spreading Beyond Gaza and Israel isn't
there because there's been a lot of talk
about contagion about this being break
breaking out into a wider War Iran
Hezbollah and now potentially Yemen
getting more and more involved how
bigger concern is
that that's what nobody wants that's
what no country or state in this region
of the world helps for but that's it's
it's it's really weird how uh the West
sees things or Israel's part and our
part we see that there is a lot of
Injustice here Gaza was under siege and
then there is some political dispute in
Israel and then all of this Revenge
comes out on the Gaza people just after
Hamas operation against uh uh uh the
Israeli government which was an
operation that is not equal to such huge
Invasion and no one wants it to be a
regional War taking more of of our
resources more of people's lives no one
wants that but that that fear might come
if it continues like that because no one
can know if will when would they get
involved and we kind of know that they
kind of eager for it okay so let's help
build peace and not drag this region
down to to to more fire and bring fire
I'm I don't know what what are we
waiting for more involvement from other
countries and and and and uh to save who
to save the Israel prime minister to
save who on the expense of
people it doesn't make any sense on the
expense of of human lives so is Israel
as a state as people that we do respect
people and humankind everywhere should
get done with that and with their
government and I say that yeah okay
Michael just after all the fighting has
finished does Israel actually have a
plan for what happens next does it want
to occupy Gaza does it want to try and
displace the millions of people that
will still be occupying that
land I think just I think to to put it
as clear as as possible i' say this is
not an invasion this is a military
operation and as I said before this but
what happens next what happens after The
Invasion yes yes yes absolutely
absolutely yes I think if it is
successful enough let's say then it
should be possible to top Hamas
Authority and to replace it with the
legitimate address of the Palestinian
people clearly it will need a
transitional period clearly it will need
Regional and international let's say
involvement so and hopefully we can we
can we can reach this point but I want
to H mention one
more word about the lack of peace
process the Israel understands now
tragically okay that lack of peace
process L lack of political let's say
momentum is a critical mistake nowadays
we have an emergency government I don't
know what happens after the war or
usually in Israel there our elections
most probably it will bring for
political change but the the the message
that Israel got that that lack of
political momentum lack of peace process
is is not healthy to put it this way to
the region to the Palestinian question
and to Israel and we should bring it as
so as soon as possible let's say to the
U equation not being naive but in order
to show what is the
alternative Shashank can you just give
us an idea of what you think is going to
happen once the fighting is all over and
done with how big a mess uh is there
going to be left in Gaza and and do you
think that Israel and other leaders in
the region actually has a plan to deal
with what whatever is left
behind right well I mean first of all
there's going to be profound destruction
we've my colleagues at The Economist
have looked at satellite images and we
estimate that around 10% of gaza's
housing stock residential housing stock
has been destroyed and we estimate that
about 280,000 people will be missing
homes so there is a huge reconstruction
challenge irrespective of whatever
happens next but in addition to that
there is a postwar governance challenge
which is to say that either Hamas is
weakened but not destroyed in which case
uh it will still be present or it will
be destroyed and there will have to be
some kind of alternative Arrangement
either um that is the Palestinian
Authority running the place uh a
coalition of Arab and Gulf countries
providing some kind of Assistance or an
a circumstance in which Hamas or even
more violent extreme Splinter movements
may find the latitude to establish
themselves and conduct further attacks
on Israel so a great deal depends on how
the war ends you know if it ends like
the other conflicts have ended with a
ceasefire a deal uh and Hamas is been
chastened but is still present we may go
back to normal but otherwise we may face
some more disordered situation that is
uh characterized by a severe lack of
governance sah we've only got about a
minute or so left just picking up on on
that point do you think that you can
ever truly get rid of Hamas I mean
surely there's a scenario that it could
potentially come back even stronger even
more
radicalized the scenario is on the
Israeli table to to take Hames as the
cape go to as an exit of this war but
unfortunately that will make it a very
long War it's very hard I think uh
weakened Hamas who who brought Hamas to
power in 2005 so I think there should be
drawing of borders first for this war to
end for sustainable peace in the region
and for sustainable security drawing
borders for both Israel and Palestine
okay thank you so much we really do
appreciate all of your time and your
insights from all of you Michael Harari
sarak Kira and shishang Joshi thank you
so much for joining us and thank you too
for watching uh you can see the program
again anytime by visiting our website
jer.com and for further discussion go to
our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ insid story for me Tom
McCrae and the whole team here goodbye
for
[Music]
now